Beautiful Indian Tourist Spots
Skip to content
HOME
Aruvikkuzhi Falls Pathanamthitta
Aruvikkuzhi fall, a jewel in the crown of Kozhencherry’s natural beauty, is worth a visit. Located in the town of River Pampa, the waterfall is feast to eyes. Read on to know more about the waterfall.


 
Aruvikkuzhi falls

aruvikkuzhi-waterfallsAruvikkuzhi waterfall a popular tourist destination is a center of attraction in the Pathanamthitta district. In Malayalam language the word ‘Aruvikkuzhy’ means a water stream with depth. Indeed the waterfall is a combination of several streams which gets collected to give birth to this waterfall.

Location

Aruvikkuzhi falls is located near Maramon, Kozhencherry in Pathanamthitta district of Kerala. The waterfall is situated at a distance of 2km from Thadiyooor and 7 km from Kozhencherry.

 How to reach

By Road: Bus services are available from Tiruvalla and Chengannur to Pathanamthitta.

By Rail: Nearest Railway station is Chengannur station.

By Air: Nearest airport terminals are Thiruvananthapuram International Airport and Cochin International Airport.

Where to stay

Heavenly Homestay at Pathanamthitta is the recommended place to stay, as the lodging rates start here at as low as Rs.1000. It is in close proximity to various tourists spots.

When to visit

Ideal time to visit this waterfall is between months October and February.

Nearby Places to visit

Kaviyoor Mahadeva Temple: Also known as Thrikkaviyoor Mahadeva temple, it is located at Kaviyoor in Pathanamthitta District. The temple is dedicated to Lord Shiva and Parvathi. Kaviyoor Mahadeva Temple is placed in a small hillock and is counted amongst the most important Shiva Temples in Kerala. Like other temples in Kerala, Kaviyoor Mahadeva temple also follows strict dress codes. Other temples located in the vicinity include Aranmula Parthasarathy temple, Kadamanitta Devi Temple, Sree Vallabha temple and Sabarimala Sri Dharmasastha temple and Bhagavathy temple. A festival is held every year in December and January, which is the perfect time to visit this temple. The temple is ancient and the architectural style is unique. And the best thing about this temple is the close proximity of other tourist places like Muloor Smarakam, Achankovi River, Konni Forest Reserve and Perunthenaruvi waterfall.
Muloor Smarakam: It is a memorial which is located in a small village named Elavumthitta near Pathanamthitta. It is at a distance of 12 km from Pathanamthitta. The memorial was made in memory of Muloor S. Padmanabha Panicker, who was a poet and social reformer of the pre-independent India. It was originally home of Padmanabha Panicker which was later on converted into a memorial by the initiative of Department of Culture of the Kerala State Government. The memorial attracts not just the historians but also other enthusiasts as Muloor Smarakam for them stands for a typical ordinary Kerala house.
Paliakara Church: It is situated in Tiruvalla in Pathanamthitta district and is counted amongst the major religious destinations for Syrian Christians. The attraction of this place apart from it being a religious hub is its architecture which dates back to the arrival of St. Thomas in A.D 54. Another attraction is the mural paintings which is done using natural vegetable dyes. The painting depicts the major events in the life of Jesus Christ. It also contains paintings of other saints like St. George. The church is open to all and the feast of St. George is considered the best time to visit this church.
 

 


 
Share this:
EmailPrintTwitterGooglePinterestFacebook
Related
Madatharuvi Fall
March 23, 2014
In "Water Falls"
Aruvikkuzhi Fall in Kottayam
March 23, 2014
In "Water Falls"
Perunthenaruvi Fall
March 17, 2014
In "Water Falls"
This entry was posted in Water Falls on March 23, 2014.
Post navigation? Ananthoni FallsAruvikkuzhi Fall in Kottayam ?
Search for:
  Search

 
RECENT POSTS

Pehowa in Kurukshetra -Temples,Location,History
Pattadakal -Temples,History,Location,How to Reach
Panchkula Religious and Historical Places,Location
Nelakondapalli History,Location,How to Reach
Nathdwara- The famous temple of Shrinathji
CATEGORIES

Beach
Bird Sanctuaries
Culture
Festivals
Folk Dance
Hill Stations
Institutions
Monuments
National Parks
Rivers
Scenic Villages
States of India
Temple Villages
Uncategorized
Water Falls
Proudly powered by WordPress
