Pathanamthitta district (Malayalam: ??????????? ?????) is a district in the southern part of Kerala, India. The district headquarters is in the town of Pathanamthitta. However,Tiruvalla city is the largest commercial centre in the district. The district is surrounded by the Kottayam, Idukki, Alappuzha and Kollam districts. It has a border with the state of Tamil Nadu in the east. Pathanamthitta, Tiruvalla, Adoor, Konni, Ranni and Mallapally are the taluks in the district. There are four municipalities in Pathanamthitta. They are Tiruvalla, Adoor, Pathanamthitta and Pandalam.

Because of the large number of pilgrims it receives, Pathanamthitta is known as "the headquarters of pilgrimage tourism" in India, and the district tourism board gave Pathanamathitta the moniker "The Abode of God". The famous pilgrimage centre of Sabarimala and The most important and famous Christian center is Parumala St Peters, St Paul's and St Gregorios Orthodox Church (http://parumalachurch.org) (Tiruvalla) famous for the tomb of Saint Gregorios Parumala Thirumeni is situated here. Having three rivers and a forest cover which includes a tiger reserve, the district also attracts many wildlife and nature enthusiasts.

According to the 2001 Census of India, the population was 1,231,577,[2] making it the third least populous district in Kerala (out of 14), after Wayanad and Idukki.[3] Pathanamthitta has been declared the first polio-free district in India.[4] The district is 10.03% urbanised.[5] Pathanamthitta is one of the richest district in India.With a number of fairs and festivals, Pathanamthitta district is known as the "headquarters of pilgrimage tourism."[25] The district receives an estimated 3 to 4 million pilgrims during the festival season of Sabarimala.[26]

Situated here among the Western Ghats is a temple dedicated to the Hindu deity, Ayyappan. The district is a host to Asia's biggest and the world's second largest Christian convention.[27] The eight-day Christian gathering in February is held at Maramon on the sand-bed of Pamba River. The three-day Christian gathering is held at Makkamkunnu, Pathanamthitta known as Makkamkunnu Convention by Malankara Orthodox Church .The Cherukolpuzha Hindu convention, Kadammanitta devi temple, the 10th century Kaviyoor mahadeva temple, Parthasarathi temple at Aranmula and anikkattilammakshethram[1] are some of the Hindu religious places of interest.


anikkattilammakshethram
The most important and famous Christian center is Parumala St Peters, St Paul's and St Gregorios Orthodox Church (http://parumalachurch.org) famous for the tomb of Saint Gregorios (Parumala Thirumeni). Millions of Pilgrims visit this church annually.St. George Orthodox Church, Mylapra or Mylapra Valiyapalli or Chakkittayil palli (?????????? ?????) is one of the famous Georgian pilgrim centre which is very close to Pathanamthitta District headquarters.


St. George Orthodox Church, Mylapra
St. George Orthodox Church, Chandanapally or Chandanapally Valiyapalli is one of the biggest churches in South India, located at a village named Chandanapally, Pathanamthitta District.


St. George Orthodox Church, Chandanapally
Some of the other Christian places of interest are St. Mary's Orthodox church at Niranam, St. Thomas Ecumenical Church at Nilackal,Manjanikkara Dayara St Stephen's Jacobite Church, Parumala Seminary and St. Mary's Orthodox Cathedral, Thumpamon also known as Thumpamon Valiya Pally, headquarters of Thumapmon Diocese of Malankara Orthodox Church. The churches at Niranam and Nilackal (Chayal) are believed to be among the seven churches founded by St. Thomas the Apostle.[28][29] The Muslim colourful Chandanakkudam festival of the Jama — Al Mosque at Pathanamthitta town attracts many visitors. Although these places are religious in nature, they attract people from all faiths.


Maramon Convention: Asia's biggest Christian gathering

Perunthenaruvi water falls
The district is known for its reserve forest and wild life. Perunthenaruvi water falls, Kakki reservoir surrounded by forest and wild animals, dam sites at Moozhyar and Maniyar, elephant training centre at Konni, Charalkunnu hill station are ideal locations for nature enthusiasts. Trekking to the Sabari Hills during January to March is also organized by Pathanamthitta District Tourism Promotion Council (DTPC).


Muloor Smarakom
Pathanamthitta district has places known for its historical importance. Among them are, ancient Valiyakoickal Temple and Palace at Pandalam, monument of Velu Thampi Dalawa at Mannadi and the Muloor Smarakom (Muloor memorial). Pandalam was the capital of the ancient Travancore kingdom.

The district has other tourist attractions. Aranmula is a major attraction for its famous metal mirrors and snake boat race. The school of traditional arts attracts foreign visitors. Founded by French artist Louba Schild, the school teaches kathakali, classical dance, classical music as well as kalarippayattu. The palace at Aranmula Aranmula kottaram has a history of 200 years.[30]

